Television and Very Young Children
DANIEL R. ANDERSON
TIFFANY A. PEMPEK

University of Massachusetts–Amherst

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recommended that children younger than 24
months of age not be exposed to television. Nevertheless, television programs and home videos are increasingly produced for very young children. This article reviews the extant
research concerning television and very young children with respect to the AAP recommendation. More very young children are currently watching television than in the recent past;
they pay substantial attention to TV programs and videos made for them. When learning from
videos is assessed in comparison to equivalent live presentations, there is usually substantially less learning from videos. Although one study finds positive associations of language
learning with exposure to some children’s TV programs, other studies find negative associations of viewing with language, cognitive, and attentional development. Background TV is
also a disruptive influence. Evidence thus far indicates that the AAP recommendation is well
taken, although considerably more research is needed.
Keywords: television; children; infants; attention; media

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) (1999) has recommended that
children younger than 24 months of age not be exposed to electronic screens.
Practically speaking, electronic screens refers to television, although toddlers
may increasingly become exposed to computers as software and interfaces are
developed for them. At the time this recommendation was made, very little was
known about toddlers’ exposure to screens, use of screens, or the impact on
them. Much of the recommendation was based on the known or presumed harmful effects of television on older children. The recommendation was thus highly
conservative, pending new research. Because the recommendation was made, a
number of research groups have begun to investigate television and very young
children. This article summarizes and reviews that research, along with some

Authors’ Note: This article and recent research described here by Anderson and collaborators was
supported in part by Grant No. BCS 011811 from the National Science Foundation. The National
Science Foundation is not responsible for the factual accuracy of this article or opinions
expressed here. Requests for reprints or questions should be directed to Daniel R. Anderson, e-mail:
Anderson@psych.umass.edu.
AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST, Vol. 48 No. 5, January 2005 505-522
DOI: 10.1177/0002764204271506
© 2005 Sage Publications

505

506

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

older studies that have received little attention in this context. We subsequently
revisit the AAP recommendation and make suggestions for future investigations.
Our review is organized in part on a distinction made by Anderson and Evans
(2001). In that largely speculative article, a contrast was made between foreground and background television. Foreground television is programming to
which very young children overtly attend in a sustained manner. Ordinarily,
foreground television consists of programming that is designed for young children and is presumably at least partially comprehensible to them. Background
television consists of programming to which very young children pay little overt
attention. Such programming is generally not produced for children and would
be largely incomprehensible to them. The distinction between foreground and
background television is relevant because foreground television could in principle be educational for very young children and have a positive impact in addition
to or instead of the presumed negative impact. Such a possibility was not considered by the AAP. On the other hand, it is hard to imagine that background television could have a positive impact if it has an impact at all. In the remainder of this
article, we examine research on very young children’s exposure and attention to
television, learning from foreground television, the effects of background television on behavior, and what is known about television’s impact on development. We conclude with a discussion of areas for future research.
EXPOSURE
Because the national television rating services do not report results on children younger than 2 years of age, there are relatively few studies of very young
children’s exposure to television. Exposure to television, of course, consists of
the total of foreground and background TV. The few studies that attempt to
assess exposure do not distinguish between foreground and background TV but
instead, ask parents how much television their children “watch” during some
period of time, such as a typical day or week. It is not clear how parents interpret
this question. They may include times the children are present with a TV set in
use but not paying overt attention, or they may answer according to their estimate of the amount of television to which the children do apparently pay attention. This is highly relevant to estimates of exposure because at home, very
young children initially pay little attention to most television programs but
extend their attention to increasingly diverse content as they mature (Anderson,
Lorch, Collins, Field, & Nathan, 1986; Schmitt, Anderson, & Collins, 1999).
Consequently the amount of television that is in the foreground increases with
development.
Christakis, Zimmerman, DiGiuseppe, and McCarty (2004) reanalyzed data
collected for a national longitudinal study during the 1980s. Parents were asked
how much television their children watched during typical weekdays and weekends. Children aged 1½ years watched an average 2.2 hours a day, whereas

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

507

children aged 3½ years watched 3.6 hours a day. The variability in the parent
estimates from this study is enormous. About 42% of the 1½-year-olds watched
no television (the modal viewing time), whereas a few parents described their
children as watching upwards of 18 hours a day. Among the 3½-year-olds, in
contrast, only about 10% were described as watching no television, and the
modal viewing time shifted to about 2 hours a day. Certain and Kahn (2003) analyzed data from later cohorts of the same study as surveyed in the early and mid1990s. They reported that of infants 0 to 11 months of age, 83% were reported as
watching no TV, whereas among 12- to 23-month-olds, 52% watched no TV
and 27% watched 1 to 2 hours a day, with the remainder watching greater
amounts. Of children from 24 to 35 months of age, 21% watched no TV, 38%
watched 1 to 2 hours a day, and the remainder watched greater amounts. It is
important to note that average figures given for very young children’s viewing
times combine large percentages of children who do not watch any TV with substantial percentages of children who do watch. In that sense, the averages are
quite misleading. In our view, all these numbers should be taken with a grain of
salt insofar as it is likely that some parents included background television in
their estimates, whereas others did not.
The introduction of baby videos such as the Baby Einstein series and TV
series such as Teletubbies in the 1990s substantially increased the amount of
foreground television available to very young children. To our knowledge, only
two studies estimate very young children’s exposure to television since these
media have become well established. Pierroutsakos, Hanna, Self, Lewis, and
Brewer (2004) surveyed 100 parents on the amount of time that children aged 2
and younger are exposed to and attend to television and videos. In this study,
parents of 100 infants, ranging in age from 2½ to 24 months, were asked to complete a diary tracking the infants’ TV exposure. On average, parents reported
that their infants were exposed to about 120 minutes of TV per day, 50% of
which was infant and toddler programming, 40% adult programming, and 9%
preteen programming. In addition, parents reported that the child attended to
about 60 minutes of TV per day, or about half of their total exposure time.
The Kaiser Family Foundation commissioned a national survey of parents of
children aged 6 months to 6 years (Rideout, Vandewater, & Wartella, 2003).
With the permission of Vicky Rideout of the Kaiser Family Foundation, we
examined reported viewing for children in the survey who were younger than 1
year of age and 1, 2, and 3 years of age. The percentages of children who did not
watch TV on a typical day were 48%, 40%, 29%, and 21% for each age group,
respectively. The corresponding percentages for videotapes and DVDs were
70%, 53%, 47%, and 49%. For those who did watch TV, the average daily times
spent watching were 1 hour 8 minutes, 1 hour 26 minutes, 1 hour 35 minutes,
and 1 hour 29 minutes, respectively. The average daily times spent with videotapes or DVDs for those who watched them were 1 hour 16 minutes, 1 hour 27
minutes, 1 hour 39 minutes, and 1 hour 29 minutes, respectively. It is interesting
to compare the numbers with those reported by parents surveyed in the early

508

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

1990s (Certain & Kahn, 2003). For children younger than 1 year of age, the
nonviewers dropped from 83% to 48% 10 years later; for 1-year-olds, the
nonviewers dropped from 52% to 40%. It is clear that a much larger percentage
of babies are watching TV and videos now. However, times spent viewing TV
and videos have actually decreased if the numbers reported by Christakis et al.
(2004) are used as a baseline against which to compare the recent data. We
expected that with the advent of baby videos and TV series, parents would have
reported more, not less, time spent viewing TV.
If the above numbers primarily represent foreground television viewing (but
we do not really know), what can we say about exposure to background television? American homes have a television set in use about 6 hours a day, on the
average (e.g., Roberts & Foehr, 2003), and Rideout et al. (2003) reported that
40% of parents with young children characterized a TV as being on “most” or
“all” of the time. In addition, Pierroutsakos et al. (2004) estimated that about
half of exposure is to TV not made for young children. We have not been able
find more specific numbers, but presumably, a large percentage of America’s
very young children are exposed to many hours of background television as
their parents or other older family members watch their programs or as the TV is
simply left on all day with no one watching. As we will argue below, foreground
and background television are likely to have distinctly different impacts and
should be clearly distinguished in future research with very young children.
FOREGROUND TELEVISION
Foreground television programming is that which is made for very young
children and to which they generally pay attention. Most television programs
and videos made for children younger than 2 are promoted as being educational
or as stimulating brain development. If these promotions have merit, then the
AAP (1999) guideline that recommends no TV viewing may not be well taken.
There are now a handful of investigations on the cognitive processing of TV by
children 24 months of age and younger. The investigations to date are suggestive
that television is a poor tool for educating very young children.
ATTENTION

In most research, children’s attention to television is inferred from overt
looking at the screen. Anderson et al. (1986) have found that attention to television at home increases with age, peaks at about 12 years of age, and thereafter
slightly declines among adults. Schmitt (2001) reported a more detailed analysis
of the very young children observed in the Anderson et al. study. She found a linear increase in attention from 6 months to 3 years of age from looking at the TV
11% of the time to 39% across all types of content. Anderson and Levin (1976)
studied young children’s attention to Sesame Street. They also found a linear

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

509

increase in looking at the TV with age from 12 to 48 months. For present purposes, it is important to note that they observed a qualitative shift in behavior at
30 months of age. Younger than that age, when children entered the viewing
room, they generally sat on the floor facing their mother with their backs to the
TV. They would play with toys, occasionally twisting around to glance at the TV.
At 30 months and older, they sat on the floor facing the TV with their backs to
their mother. They played with toys but glanced at the TV much more frequently
and with longer sustained looks. Remarkably, the parents also identified TV
viewing at home as sharply increasing at 30 months of age.
In general, Anderson and his colleagues (e.g., Anderson & Lorch, 1983)
argued that the increase in looking at TV from infancy through the preschool
years was due to increased comprehensibility of television as children mature.
They suggested that the sharp increase in viewing at 30 months represented the
coming together of cognitive and language development such that Sesame Street
and other preschool programs became sufficiently understandable to allow the
child to sustain attention to them. It also represented the point at which the child
developed the idea of “watching TV” as a behavioral organizer while with television. With experience, the child not only comprehends more but also becomes
increasingly selective and cognitively active in the ways that he or she watches
TV (see also Huston & Wright, 1983, 1989).
Although systematic TV viewing may begin between 2 and 3 years of age,
there is nevertheless a remarkable consistency in the ways infants, children, and
adults look at TV. A series of studies, reviewed by Richards and Anderson (in
press), find that for all ages from 3 months to adult, the distribution of look
lengths at television is lognormal. That is, the distribution is skewed so that there
are many short looks under about 3 seconds in length interspersed with progressively much longer looks. Although the modal look length is about a second, the
average look length is about 15 seconds. This difference between the mode and
the average is due to some very long looks that may last for many minutes. Age
differences in looking are primarily due to more very long looks among older
viewers. Associated with this pattern is a phenomenon called attentional inertia.
As a look at the TV is sustained, the viewer becomes less distractible, becomes
slower to react to secondary tasks, has a pattern of heart rate that indicates
focused attention, and remembers more about the content. Whatever the differences are between very young children and older TV viewers, the underlying
attentional processes are apparently quite similar.
Until the 1990s, the story about very young children younger than 2 years of
age seemed simple: They paid little attention to TV because they understood little of what they saw, in part because preschool children’s television programs
were produced for an audience aged 2 years and up. What attention they did pay
could be explained as elicited by visual and auditory changes that produced orienting responses and, thus, brief periods of attention (e.g., Huston & Wright,
1983). The story became complicated in the 1990s when videos and TV series
for the first time were directed at infants and toddlers.

510

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

Very young children pay attention to these videos and series. Barr et al.
(2003) showed baby videos to children aged 12 to 15 months in their homes.
They found substantial amounts of looking at these videos, 48% to 74%,
depending on the video and whether it was familiar. In our current research, we
have been looking at very young children’s attention to Teletubbies. We have
found high levels of looking by 18- and 24-month-olds as they sit on parents’
laps and have toys to play with on a table in front of them (Frankenfield et al.,
2004). These levels of looking at the baby videos and at Teletubbies are much
greater than those observed by Anderson and Levin (1976) for 12-, 18-, and 24month-olds looking at Sesame Street. It appears that videos and TV programs
that are directed at infants and toddlers can gain high levels of sustained
attention.
It is not yet clear as to what underlies very young children’s attention to TV.
Theories distinguish between two major alternatives. One possibility is that
their attention is driven by visual and auditory changes or what have come to be
called the formal features of television (Huston & Wright, 1983). The other possibility, not mutually exclusive, is that their attention is driven by higher cognitive factors, especially their ability to comprehend what they watch (Anderson
& Lorch, 1983). Huston and Wright (1983, 1987) theorized that early in development, formal features drive attention, but with cognitive maturity and experience with television, attention becomes more strategically driven by cognitive
factors including comprehension. In the case of infants and toddlers, if comprehension is minimal, attention to television by very young children may be purely
reactive due to frequent elicitations of the orienting reaction by visual and auditory change. On the other hand, programs that are directed at them may be
comprehensible and, thus, reflect higher cognitive processing.
Does comprehensibility influence attention in very young children? Barr
et al. (2003) found that 12- to 15-month-olds pay much more attention to a
familiar baby video than to an unfamiliar one. This suggests that their attention
is not driven by novelty alone or perhaps even primarily. But preferring familiarity does not mean that these toddlers actually comprehend anything they are
seeing.
Anderson, Lorch, Field, and Sanders (1981) examined 2-, 3½-, and 5-yearolds’ looking at Sesame Street in relation to comprehensibility. They manipulated comprehensibility by randomly reordering shots, by making dialogue run
backwards, or by using foreign language. Children at all ages looked less when
the segments were rendered less comprehensible. Important for present purposes is that 24-month-olds were sensitive to both normative sequences of shots
and to language, regardless of the fact that the formal features were not changed
by these manipulations. Thus, the cognitive meaningfulness of television is an
important driver of attention in children as young as 24 months.
The question arises as to whether children younger than 24 months are sensitive to comprehensibility. In ongoing research, we are presenting normal and
distorted versions of the program Teletubbies to toddlers and infants. Using the

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

511

procedures developed by Anderson et al. (1981), we distort comprehensibility
by using either random shot sequences or backward speech. To date, we have
examined 24- and 18-month-olds. We found that looks at television were shorter
if the Teletubbies segments were reduced in comprehensibility (for both types of
distortion), with no significant age differences in the effects of comprehensibility (Frankenfield et al., 2004). Children as young as 18 months are sensitive to
sequential and linguistic reductions in comprehensibility. This finding suggests
that they are processing TV beyond a primitive orienting and perceptual level.
Given this evidence of cognitive processing, television could, at least in principle, be educational for them. It is interesting, however, that the children were just
as interactive (pointing, smiling, labeling) with the normal and distorted versions of the program. In future work, we plan to extend this experiment to 12and 6-month-olds. There is presumably some youngest age at which children
will not be sensitive to the sequential and linguistic aspects of children’s TV programs such as Teletubbies. At that age and younger, it would be hard to argue
that such programs are educational.
Valkenburg and Vroone (2004) examined attention to television in children
ranging from 6 to 58 months of age. They showed children, in the children’s
homes, a video composed of six brief television segments that varied in complexity, for instance, news, children’s commercials, and Teletubbies. They
found that very young children paid more attention to programs with simple
content (e.g., Teletubbies), whereas older children paid greater attention to more
difficult content (e.g., Lion King II). Across the age groups, segments of programming designed for adults received low levels of attention. The findings support the idea that attention is highest for content that remains within the child’s
level of comprehensibility. A more detailed assessment measuring children’s
attention to particular scenes indicates that salient formal features such as music
and bright colors primarily drove attention in the youngest children (ages 6 to 18
months). With age, however, attention became increasingly less focused on formal features and more on content conveyed by nonsalient features. Valkenburg
and Vroone suggested that between the ages of 1½ and 2½ years, children begin
to rely less on salient formal features of television and more on nonsalient features and content.
COMPREHENSION AND LEARNING

Even if very young children are sensitive to the comprehensibility of TV programs, it is another question as to whether they can or do learn anything from
them. The totality of results thus far suggests that very young children learn less
from television than from equivalent real-life experiences. We refer to this as the
video deficit.
One line of experiments focuses on imitation. In the typical experiment, a
child is shown either a live or video version of an experimenter engaged in demonstrating the functioning of a puppet. The demonstrated functions could be

512

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

simple one-step operations, such as removing a mitten; or they could be more
complicated operations, such as removing a mitten, shaking it to demonstrate a
bell inside the mitten, and then removing the bell. Even after a 24-hour delay,
12- to 15-month-olds have little difficulty imitating the live demonstrations, but
they are quite poor at imitating the video demonstrations, showing some success
only with the one-step demonstrations (Barr & Hayne, 1999). When this procedure was extended to children as old as 30 months, the imitations were still
poorer when based on video (Hayne, Herbert, & Simcock, 2003). Only when
children received six repetitions of the video did imitation performance become
as good as a single live demonstration (Muentener, Price, Garcia, & Barr, 2004).
Of considerable interest, Muentener et al. (2004) found imitation from video
with six repetitions in infants as young as 6 months of age. Note that the above
experiments compared live demonstrations with video that was as comparable
to the live demonstrations as possible. If standard techniques of television production (editing, zoom shots, sound effects) are applied to the demonstrations,
then performance does improve (Barr & Hayne, 1999).
A second line of research uses variations on an object retrieval task. Children
are shown a toy being hidden in an adjacent room and then are asked to go into
that room and retrieve the toy. In the typical study, one group watches through a
window as the toy is being hidden and another group watches the hiding event
on video. If they saw the hiding event while watching through a window, 24month-olds correctly retrieved the toy without searching multiple locations. If
they saw the hiding event on TV, however, their performance was very poor
(Schmitt & Anderson, 2002; Suddendorf, 2003; Troseth & DeLoache, 1998).
On either task, 3-year-olds did well (Schmitt & Anderson, 2002); 2½-year-olds
did well with video in one study (Troseth & DeLoache, 1998) and at an intermediate level in another (Schmitt & Anderson, 2002). It is not known why 2-yearolds do so poorly when the hiding information is presented by video. The problem is not due to the three-dimensional nature of the search task, as was hypothesized by Schmitt and Anderson (2002). Evans, Crawley, and Anderson (2004)
found the video deficit even when the search space was a 2-dimensional felt
board. The problem is also not due to the visual nature of the task. In their second
experiment, Evans, Crawley, et al. simply told the children where the toy was
hidden. If a real person told where the toy was hidden the children successfully
retrieved it. If the same person, via closed-circuit TV, told where the toy was
hidden, the children were not able to retrieve it.
Difficulty with the video toy retrieval problem experienced by 2-year-olds is
not a consequence of absorbing no information from TV whatsoever. Their performance was substantially better on the first than later search trials, indicating
that they did remember something from TV at least on the first trial (Evans,
Crawley, et al., 2004; Schmitt & Anderson, 2002; Suddendorf, 2003). Once they
had the experience of actually finding the toy in a particular location in the room,
however, that experience appears to have overwhelmed any information provided by television. After the first trial, the children would generally search for

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

513

the toy where it had been hidden the previous trial (known as the perseverative
error). In light of the findings that this problem did not exist if they viewed
through a window (or were told by a real person) where the toy was hidden, it
appears that they found something deeply unconvincing about information
provided by TV as a basis for guiding their behavior.
It is interesting that if 2-year-olds are given extensive experience with closedcircuit video, frequently seeing themselves live on TV during a 2-week period,
they are then able to perform correctly on the toy retrieval task (Troseth, 2003).
This indicates that by 24 months, the video deficit may be overcome by relevant
experience, suggesting that the video deficit is not necessarily a consequence of
fundamental and biologically based cognitive immaturity.
A third line of research is concerned with language learning. Children 2 years
and older can clearly learn vocabulary from television (Naigles & Kako, 1993;
Rice, Huston, Truglio, & Wright, 1990; Rice & Woodsmall, 1988). Nevertheless, when comparisons are made between video and equivalent live conditions
in children younger than 2½ years, the results suggest a video deficit. Grela, Lin,
and Krcmar (2003) tried to teach object labels either live, in an equivalent video,
or in a version of Teletubbies that used the labels. They found better learning in
the live as compared to video conditions. Learning from video by children near
their 2nd birthday was substantially better than that by younger children.
Infants are able to perceive many phonetic contrasts that are not found in their
native language; this ability is lost by about 12 months of age if infants are not
exposed to other languages. Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu (2003) exposed American
infants to contrasts found in Mandarin. One group of infants was exposed to live
speakers of Mandarin for about 5 hours during 12 sessions between 9 and 10
months of age. Other groups were exposed to equivalent audiovisual or audioonly DVDs. The infants exposed to live speakers did not experience the loss of
ability to perceive Mandarin contrasts. Infants exposed to the DVD stimuli,
however, showed the same loss as infants exposed to no Mandarin at all. Again,
this research indicates a profound video (and audio) deficit.
Finally, one experiment represents a fourth line of research. Mumme and
Fernald (2003) were interested in whether infants could learn emotional responses
from video. They exposed 10- and 12-month-old infants to videos in which an
actress was portrayed as looking at a novel object with a positive facial expression and talking about the object with a positive tone of voice. The actress
looked at other objects fearfully and with a fearful tone of voice. Subsequently,
the infants were presented with the objects. The main result was that 12-montholds avoided the “fearful” object but did not show increased approach behavior
to the positive object. The 10-month-olds showed no avoidance of the fearful
object or increased approach to the positive object. Thus, only in one of the four
conditions did infants show emotional learning from video.
Although the experimental studies are still few, they are remarkably consistent in indicating a video deficit for children 24 months and younger. Although

514

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

there is some learning indicated by some of the studies, the learning is dramatically less than that found for equivalent live displays.
BACKGROUND TELEVISION
As defined by Anderson and Evans (2001), background television refers to
content that is not explicitly designed for young children and to which they pay
little active attention. Young children’s exposure to background television typically occurs when a caregiver or older sibling watches such content.
Little is known about the impact that exposure to background television has
on very young children. In principle, background TV can be distracting and
interfering as the child tries to engage in other activities such as toy play or interacting with family members. Toy play is typically considered by most theories
of child development to be a necessary and valuable activity for young children,
as are social interactions with parents. Toy play constitutes about 32% of the
activity in which 2-year-olds were observed to engage at home during television
exposure, with socializing occurring 39% of the time (Schmitt, Woolf, &
Anderson, 2003). Research suggests that when young children are interrupted
during play, they have difficulty returning to the play episode and if they do, it is
typically less intense (DiLalla & Watson, 1988). Thus, to the extent to which
television disrupts children from episodes of play, it may have a negative impact.
Research on parent-child interaction suggests that complexity of a child’s play is
increased with parental support (Alessandri, 1992). Thus, the extent to which
television draws parental attention away from the child may reduce interactions
between parents and children and thereby create both direct and indirect effects
of background television on the child. In light of the extensive amount of exposure that infants and toddlers have to background television, any cumulative
impact may be substantial.
Research directly assessing the impact of background media on play and
parent-child interactions is limited to recent research in our laboratory. We
observed 12-, 24-, and 36-month-old children’s toy play with and without a television program playing in the background (Jeopardy!). Parents were asked to
limit interactions with their children so that we could observe the impact of the
TV on toy play independent of parent-child interaction. We found that background television diminished both the lengths of play episodes and the degree of
focused attention during object play (Evans, Pempek, Kirkorian, Frankenfield,
& Anderson, 2004).
This negative impact of background television may also hold when parents
are allowed to interact with their child as they typically would at home. Results
of an ongoing study in our laboratory indicate that interactions between parents
and children are substantially decreased in the presence of background television. Analysis of interactions between parents and their 24-month-olds indicate
a 22% reduction when the TV was on (Murphy, 2004).

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

515

IMPACT OF TELEVISION
Thus far, the research indicates that there is growing use of television by very
young children, and that they pay attention to programs made for them. Children
are sensitive to comprehensibility as young as 18 months of age, but there is a
video deficit in learning from television insofar as learning is substantially less
from video compared to equivalent live displays. In addition, background television disrupts play and interactions with parents. With these findings in mind, we
now consider the small literature on the impact of television on very young
children.
LANGUAGE

In a case study reviewed by Naigles and Mayeux (2001), Sachs, Bard, and
Johnson (1981) analyzed the speech of a 3-year-old boy with deaf parents
whose only exposure to spoken English was via television. Although this boy
had clearly acquired vocabulary, his grammar was seriously dysfunctional, suggesting that he had acquired little if any grammar from exposure to television.
Although the boy had acquired vocabulary, it is not known how much, if any,
was acquired before the age of 2 years.
Although not the primary goal, a study by Nelson (1973) assesses the impact
of foreground television in a larger investigation of language development during the 2nd year of life. Nelson found that the amount of time children watched
television (primarily Sesame Street, as reported by mothers) was negatively
associated with several measures of language development, such as the rate at
which children acquired words, and developmental markers, such as the age
when 50 words had been acquired.
Recently, Linebarger and Walker (2005 [this issue]) analyzed vocabulary
and expressive language in 30-month-olds in relation to TV viewing logs kept
by parents starting at 6 months of age. Unlike other studies, this one analyzes
outcome in relation to the particular programs to which the children were
exposed. Programs associated with enhanced language growth were Dora the
Explorer, Blue’s Clues, Dragon Tales, Arthur, and Clifford. Programs associated
with reduced language growth were Sesame Street and Teletubbies. Barney and
Friends was associated with reduced vocabulary but increased expressive language. Total viewing, including adult programming, was associated with
reduced vocabulary but slightly increased expressed language. This is provocative research indicating that early television viewing may have both positive and
negative impacts on language development, depending on content. Alternatively, the associations may be due to selection effects with slower language
learners being drawn to different programs than faster language learners.
It is interesting to note that two studies (Linebarger & Walker, 2005; Nelson,
1973) find negative associations of language development and viewing Sesame
Street younger than the age of 2 years. This stands in contrast to consistent find-

516

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

ings of increased language development associated with viewing of Sesame
Street by older children (Anderson et al., 2001; Rice et al., 1990; Wright,
Huston, Scantlin, & Kotler, 2001). The producers of Sesame Street have always
considered their target audience to be children 2 years and older. It may be that
by being too advanced for children younger than 2, the program actually hinders
rather than helps language development in such young children.
SYMPTOMS OF ATTENTION DISORDERS

In a reanalysis of data collected in a longitudinal study during the 1980s,
Christakis et al. (2004) examined the associations between early TV viewing
and later symptoms of attention disorders. Time spent TV viewing (without reference to content) was assessed from parent estimates when the children were
1½ and 3½ years of age. Symptoms of attention disorders were assessed at age 7
years from five questions asked of the parents. For example, the parent was
asked if the child had trouble concentrating, with the possible answers being
never, some of the time, or all of the time. The researchers considered a symptom as being present if the parent answered sometimes or all of the time to the
question. The symptoms were summed so that a child would receive a score
from 0 to 5. Children in the upper 10% of the resulting distribution were considered as having symptoms of attention disorders. After statistically controlling
for a large array of parent, child, and home factors, the researchers reported a
small positive association (an odds ratio of 1.09) between viewing at age 1½
years and having symptoms of attention disorders. They repeated the analysis
for 3½-year-old viewing and found the same small association. Not taking
advantage of the longitudinal nature of the data, they did not control for 1½year-old viewing to assess the 3½-year-old association or the reverse. It would
have been very useful to know whether the 3½-year-old viewing accounted for
variance additional to that accounted by 1½-year-old viewing or whether the
association is established by 1½ years and does not change thereafter. It should
also be noted that the viewing data were collected in the 1980s when there were
no TV programs directed at children younger than 2. As with any correlational
study, the Christakis et al. findings are open to alternative interpretations.
Although it is possible that early TV viewing causes later symptoms of attention
disorders, it is also possible that children with attention disorders are selectively
drawn to early TV viewing. It could also be that the children, who may be hyperactive, are more likely to calm down when with TV; their parents may therefore
encourage TV viewing. This latter interpretation is consistent with findings
reported by Pierroutsakos et al. (2004) that 70% of parents say their infant is less
fussy when watching TV, and 55% say their infant becomes more focused when
watching TV.

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

517

COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

In a series of studies, Wachs (1986) examined the effects of background
noise and household chaos on development of infants and toddlers. He identified background television as an important component of background noise.
He reported that background noise is associated with poorer cognitive
development.
Carew (1980) conducted a longitudinal study of the impact of six “intellectual sources” on spatial and language skills related to intelligence. These skills
were assessed by means of items taken from standardized tests. The six sources
varied to the extent that the child was active in constructing his or her own experience, ranging from active construction during solitary play to shared construction during interactions with others and finally, to passive construction during
television viewing. Participants were 23 children who were observed in their
homes at several points between the ages of 12 and 33 months. Associations
were consistent with the hypothesis that television had a negative impact on cognitive development during the first 2 years of life. However, from about 24
months and older, the impact of television became positive and the associations
were stronger. The Carew study did not distinguish between types of content to
which the children were exposed, but given the era, the foreground programs
were most likely Sesame Street, Mister Rogers’Neighborhood, Captain Kangaroo, and Romper Room School.
A study by von Stauffenberg and Campbell (2004) assesses the relationship
between TV viewing and quality of child care in a subsample from a larger study
by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development in which participants were families with children born in 1991. Data were collected when the
children were approximately 36 months of age. Results indicate that children
who were cared for in their own homes watched the most TV, those in family day
care watched an intermediate amount, and those in day care centers watched the
least. In addition, greater TV viewing was associated with poorer cognitive outcomes for children cared for in their homes by a nonmaternal caregiver but not
for those in family day care or day care centers. It should be noted that this study
does not differentiate between foreground and background television exposure.
It may be that children in more formal day care settings were presented with programming designed for them, whereas those at home were exposed to both
foreground and background television.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
When we have talked to parents about the effects of TV on very young children, the most common questions focus on violent or scary content. We are not
aware of any studies that examine the consequences of exposure to these types

518

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

of content. Although there is some evidence that very young children can learn
emotional responses from TV, most of the research focuses on cognitive issues.
The research indicates that very young children are much more likely to
watch TV than they did in the past. Given that children watch, it is unclear
whether time spent viewing has changed. They pay attention to video that is
made for them, and their patterns of attention are remarkably similar to those of
older children and adults. They are sensitive to the sequential and linguistic
comprehensibility of video at least as young as 18 months of age. That said, the
evidence so far indicates a video deficit when it comes to learning. There is less
learning from a video display as compared to an equivalent live display. This is
not to say that no learning occurs. With sufficient repetition, learning from video
can match learning from a live display. With respect to impact, one study finds
positive associations of vocabulary growth with viewing particular children’s
TV programs and negative associations with other programs. Other studies find
negative associations of viewing before age 2 with language, cognitive, and
attentional development. Associations become positive after age 2 when educational programs are viewed. Background adult television is a disruptive
influence both on children’s play and on parent-child interactions.
At the time of this writing, the AAP (1999) guideline, adopted without the
guidance of almost any relevant research, appears to have been prescient. With
the exception of the Linebarger and Walker (2005) findings, there is very little
evidence that children younger than 2 learn anything useful from television. The
evidence indicates that learning from television by very young children is poor
and that exposure to television is associated with relatively poor outcomes. For
example, two studies find that viewing of Sesame Street by children younger
than 2 is associated with poorer language development, notwithstanding that
research with older children finds valuable learning and long-term positive outcomes (e.g., Anderson, Huston, Schmitt, Linebarger, & Wright, 2001; Rice
et al., 1990; Wright et al., 2001).
With the caveat that the total amount of research is still small, it appears that
for children younger than 2 years of age, television has a different impact than it
does for older children. Not yet addressed are the reasons why. One possibility is
that television, although substantially iconic in its representation, is nevertheless a symbolic medium. For example, when we see a shot of a building followed
by a cut to an interior room shot, we infer that the room is inside of the building.
This inference is based on experience with the medium so that we understand
that the juxtaposition of shots symbolizes the containment relationship between
the room and the building. Children younger than 2, on the other hand, have
been widely characterized as functioning in a sensorimotor manner with symbolic understanding quite limited (e.g., Piaget, 1952). It may be that television in
its present form is difficult for children younger than 2 to comprehend, even
though they are, to some extent, sensitive to the canonical order of shots in a program such as Teletubbies. There are, of course, other possibilities than a lack of
symbolic awareness, including immature perceptual, linguistic, attentional, and

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

519

other cognitive skills. Whatever the case, by about age 2½ years, understanding
of television appears to improve significantly, and the evidence for a positive
impact of educational television is clear.
What is also clear is that additional research is needed. First, it is important to
try to understand the reasons why there is so little apparent learning from video.
A useful line of research would be to experimentally develop videos for very
young children that are designed to maximize learning of a specified type, for
example vocabulary. With systematic experimentation, it might be possible to
develop far more effective educational videos than currently exist. After all,
with substantial repetition, Barr et al. (2003) have shown that infants as young as
6 months of age can show imitation learning from video. Such research may
help clarify the problems with video while at the same time providing guidelines
for educationally successful video production. Second, it is important to begin
to assess the impact of new video technologies as they are entering American
homes. We found substantial disruptive effects of background TV using a 19inch standard National Television Standards Committee monaural TV set.
Many American homes are acquiring “home theaters” incorporating largeformat high-definition screens with surround sound. It seems likely that the disruptive effects of background TV will only be magnified. On the other hand, as
foreground television, it is possible that these new technologies will enhance
learning.
Finally, and most important, prospective longitudinal studies and intervention experiments should be undertaken. Such experiments should, among other
things, compare the AAP (1999) recommended “best practice” of no exposure
to screens with current standard exposure to television. Although we have hints
that television may be having a negative impact on children younger than 2 years
old, the evidence is still weak and open to alternative explanations. As a society,
we are engaged in a vast and uncontrolled experiment with our infants and toddlers, plunging them into home environments that are saturated with electronic
media. We should try to understand what we are doing and what are the
consequences.
REFERENCES
Alessandri, S. M. (1992). Mother-child interactional correlates of maltreated and nonmaltreated
children’s play behavior. Development & Psychopathology, 4, 257-270.
American Academy of Pediatrics. (1999). Media education. Pediatrics, 104, 341-342.
Anderson, D. R., & Evans, M. K. (2001). Peril and potential of media for infants and toddlers. Zero to
Three, 22(2), 10-16.
Anderson, D. R., Huston, A. C., Schmitt, K. L., Linebarger, D. L., & Wright, J. C. (2001). Early
childhood television viewing and adolescent behavior. Monographs of the Society for Research
in Child Development, 68(1, Serial No. 264).
Anderson, D. R., & Levin, S. R. (1976). Young children’s attention to Sesame Street. Child Development, 47, 806-811.

520

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST

Anderson, D. R., & Lorch, E. P. (1983). Looking at television: Action or reaction? In J. Bryant &
D. R. Anderson (Eds.), Children’s understanding of TV: Research on attention and comprehension (pp. 1-34). New York: Academic Press.
Anderson, D. R., Lorch, E. P., Collins, P. A., Field, D. E., & Nathan, J. G. (1986). Television viewing
at home: Age trends in visual attention and time with TV. Child Development, 57, 1024-1033.
Anderson, D. R., Lorch, E. P., Field, D. E., & Sanders, J. (1981). The effect of television program
comprehensibility on preschool children’s visual attention to television. Child Development, 52,
151-157.
Barr, R., Chavez, M., Fujimoto, M., Garcia, A., Muentener, P., & Strait, C. (2003, April). Television
exposure during infancy: Patterns of viewing, attention, and interaction. Poster session presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, Tampa, FL.
Barr, R., & Hayne, H. (1999). Developmental changes in imitation from television during infancy.
Child Development, 70, 1067-1081.
Carew, J. V. (1980). Experience and the development of intelligence in young children at home and in
day care. Monographs for the Society for Research in Child Development, 45(6-7, Serial
No. 187).
Certain, L. K., & Kahn, R. S. (2003). Prevalence, correlates, and trajectory of television viewing
among infants and toddlers. Pediatrics, 109, 634-642.
Christakis, D. A., Zimmerman, F. J., DiGiuseppe, D. L., & McCarty, C. A. (2004). Early television
exposure and subsequent attentional problems in children. Pediatrics, 113, 708-713.
DiLalla, L. F., & Watson, M. (1988). Differentiation of fantasy and reality: Preschooler’s reactions to
interruptions in their play. Developmental Psychology, 24, 286-291.
Evans, M. L., Crawley, A. M., & Anderson, D. R. (2004). Two-year-olds’ object retrieval based on
television: Testing a perceptual account. Unpublished manuscript, University of Massachusetts–
Amherst.
Evans, M. K., Pempek, T. A., Kirkorian, H. L., Frankenfield, A. E., & Anderson, D. R. (2004, May).
The impact of background television on complexity of play. Paper presented at the Biennial International Conference for Infant Studies, Chicago.
Frankenfield, A. E., Richards, J. R., Lauricella, A. R., Pempek, T. A., Kirkorian, H. L., & Anderson,
D. R. (2004, May). Looking at and interacting with comprehensible and incomprehensible
Teletubbies. Poster session presented at the Biennial International Conference for Infant Studies,
Chicago.
Grela, B., Lin, Y., & Krcmar, M. (2003, April). Can television be used to teach vocabulary to toddlers? Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Speech Language Hearing Association, Chicago.
Hayne, H., Herbert, J., & Simcock, G. (2003). Imitation from television by 24- and 30-month-olds.
Developmental Science, 6(3), 254-261.
Huston, A. C., & Wright, J. C. (1983). Children’s processing of television: The informative functions
of formal features. In J. Bryant & D. R. Anderson (Eds.), Children’s understanding of television:
Research on attention and comprehension (pp. 35-68). New York: Academic Press.
Huston, A. C., & Wright, J. C. (1989). The forms of television and the child viewer. In G. Comstock
(Ed.), Public communication and behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 103-158). New York: Academic Press.
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao, F., & Liu, H. (2003). Foreign language experience in infancy: Effects of short term
exposure and interaction on phonetic learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 9096-9101.
Linebarger, D. L., & Walker, D. (2005). Infants’ and toddlers’ television viewing and language outcomes. American Behavioral Scientist, 48, 624-645.
Muentener, P., Price, K., Garcia, A., & Barr, R. (2004, April). Transferring the representation:
Infants can imitate from television. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Eastern Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.
Mumme, D. L., & Fernald, A. (2003). The infant as onlooker: Learning from emotional reactions
observed in a television scenario. Child Development, 74, 221-237.

Anderson, Pempek / TV AND VERY YOUNG CHILDREN

521

Murphy, L. (2004). The effect of background television on parent-child interactions. Unpublished
honor’s thesis, University of Massachusetts–Amherst.
Naigles, L. R., & Kako, E. T. (1993). First contact in verb acquisition: Defining a role for syntax.
Child Development, 64, 1665-1687.
Naigles, L. R., & Mayeux, L. (2001). Television as incidental language teacher. In D. G. Singer &
J. L. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the media (pp. 135-152). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Nelson, K. (1973). Structure and strategy in learning to talk. Monographs of the Society for Research
in Child Development, 38(1-2, Serial No. 149).
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York: Norton.
Pierroutsakos, S. L., Hanna, M. M., Self, J. A., Lewis, E. N., & Brewer, C. J. (2004, May). Baby
Einsteins everywhere: The amount and nature of television and video viewing of infants birth to 2
years. Paper presented at the Biennial International Conference for Infant Studies, Chicago.
Rice, M. L., Huston, A. C., Truglio, R., & Wright, J. (1990). Words from Sesame Street: Learning
vocabulary while viewing. Developmental Psychology, 26, 421-428.
Rice, M. L., & Woodsmall, L. (1988). Lessons from television: Children’s word learning when viewing. Child Development, 59, 420-429.
Richards, J. E., & Anderson, D. R. (in press). Attentional inertia in children’s extended looking at
television. In R. V. Kail (Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior (Vol. 32). Amsterdam: Academic Press.
Rideout, V. J., Vandewater, E. A., & Wartella, E. A. (2003). Zero to six: Electronic media in the lives
of infants, toddlers and preschoolers. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation.
Roberts, D. F., & Foehr, U. G. (2003). Kids & media in America. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sachs, J., Bard, B., & Johnson, M. (1981). Language learning with restricted input: Case studies of
two hearing children of deaf parents. Applied Psycholinguistics, 2, 33-54.
Schmitt, K. L. (2001). Infants, toddlers, and television: The ecology of the home. Zero to Three,
22(2), 17-23.
Schmitt, K. L., & Anderson, D. R. (2002). Television and reality: Toddlers’use of visual information
from video to guide behavior. Media Psychology, 4, 51-76.
Schmitt, K. L., Anderson, D. R., & Collins, P. A. (1999). Form and content: Looking at visual features of television. Developmental Psychology, 35, 1156-1167.
Schmitt, K. L., Woolf, K. D., & Anderson, D. R. (2003). Viewing the viewers: Viewing behaviors by
children and adults during television programs and commercials. Journal of Communication,
53(2), 265-281.
Suddendorf, T. (2003). Early representational insight: Twenty-four-month-olds can use a photo to
find an object in the world. Child Development, 74, 896-904.
Troseth, G. (2003). TV guide: Two-year-old children learn to use video as a source of information.
Developmental Psychology, 39, 140-150.
Troseth, G. L., & DeLoache, J. (1998). The medium can obscure the message: Young children’s
understanding of video. Child Development, 69, 950-965.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Vroone, M. (2004). Developmental changes in infants’ and toddlers’ attention
to television entertainment. Communication Research, 31, 288-311.
von Stauffenberg, C., & Campbell, S. B. (2004, May). Television watching associated with quality of
child care and cognitive outcomes in children. Paper presented at the Biennial International Conference for Infant Studies, Chicago.
Wachs, T. D. (1986). Ambient background noise and early development. Children’s Environments
Quarterly, 3(1), 23-33.
Wright, J. C., Huston, A. C., Scantlin, R., & Kotler, J. (2001). The Early Window Project: “Sesame
Street” prepares children for school. In S. M. Fisch & R. T. Truglio (Eds.), “G” is for “growing”:
Thirty years of research on children and Sesame Street (pp. 97-114). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

522

AMERICAN BEHAVIORAL SCIENTIST
DANIEL R. ANDERSON received his Ph.D. from Brown University and is professor of psychology at the University of Massachusetts–Amherst. His current research concerns the
impact of television on infants and toddlers, brain activation during media use, and the relationship between television use and diet.
TIFFANY A. PEMPEK received her B.S. in psychology and her M.A. in clinical psychology
both from the University of Dayton. She is currently a doctoral student at the University of
Massachusetts–Amherst involved with projects concerning the effects of background television on very young children as well as infants’ and toddlers’ comprehension of television.

